---
title: "Fun with Pen and Paper: Race Cars"
date: "2021-08-08"
---

I recently came across some fun games that can be played using nothing but a
pen and some paper. One of those games was called "Race Cars" and I wondered
how on earth you would play a racing game on paper, and the answer is: simple
math!

## The core idea

The goal of the game is to cross the finish line of a hand-drawn race track
first without hitting the edge. Race cars have a velocity that can be adjusted
each move. If you're too greedy, you will crash. If you hit the breaks too
early, another player will win.

## How it's played

We start out with a hand-drawn race track. The shape really can be anything you
like. Just be creative!

![A race track on paper](/assets/paperracer/0.jpg)

Next, each player makes a cross on the starting line. This resembles the
players racecar. Right now, none of the cars is moving. They have a velocity of
0 on the x axis and 0 on the y axis.

![Two crosses on the starting line](/assets/paperracer/1.jpg)

Each move, a player can accelerate or decelerate his vehicle by 1 on any axis.
The first move of each player is somewhat obvious. They want to accelerate
straight forward. On our race track, that means accelerate by 1 on the y axis.

![A race car made a move](/assets/paperracer/2.jpg)

Next, we can either keep on accelerating like the red player does, or "turn"
our vehicle left by changing our y velocity from 0 to -1, which gives us a
velocity of -1, 1.

![Paper race cars after two moves](/assets/paperracer/3.jpg)

On a long stretch, the red player wants to overtake blue by keeping his foot on
the paddle. Blue on the other hand plays it safe and hits the breaks.

![Paper race cars on a long stretch](/assets/paperracer/4.jpg)

Soon after, red realizes his mistake. Being so busy trying to turn, he's unable
to hit the breaks. A crash is inevitable. Blue however continues to take the
turn nice and slow. His humble mind brought him victory!

![The red player right before crashing into a wall](/assets/paperracer/5.jpg)

## It's all about fun

The concept of this game is very flexible. You can play it with a friend and
see who's the fastest paper racer, or by yourself and try to beat your record.
Getting tired of just cruising around? Introduce the concept of "items" that
give you a boost or slow down the opponent (think Mario Kart!). If ordinary
tracks are boring, try adding intersections or obstacles. Can you add a third
dimension? The sky is the limit. Get out there and be creative.

This is post 018 of [#100DaysToOffload](https://100daystooffload.com/).
